adds binary data chapter (#1137)
hadley/r4ds: binary-data-formats.qmd

Instead of using `read_csv()` we'll use the `open_dataset()` function from the arrow package:

```{r open-dataset}
seattle_lib <- open_dataset(
  sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.csv", 
  format = "csv"
)
```

When this code is run, `open_dataset()` scans the first part of the file: it reads enough rows to work out the structure of the data set structure and creates the `seattle_lib` object that stores metadata.
The data remain on-disk, and are not loaded into memory.
Nevertheless, we are able to call dplyr functions to interact with the data:

```{r glimpse-data}
#| cache: true
glimpse(seattle_lib)
```

The first line in the output tell you that `seattle_lib` is stored locally on-disk as a single csv file.
The second line indicates that the data are stored as a tabular data set with 41 million rows and 12 columns.

### Partitioning datasets

When data sets become large it is often useful to split them across many files rather than storing everything in a single large file.

> When this structuring is done intelligently, the multi-file strategy can lead to significant improvements in performance because some analyses will only require a subset of the files to be read.

Reviewer: And you your computer can work on multiple pieces in parallel? Or is that true if you use parquet even without partitioning?

Author: I am pretty sure this is true for parquet data even without partitioning because the Dataset API can leverage the internal row grouping within the parquet file. I can't verify the difference using a dplyr (because honestly I haven't quite worked out all the details of how the dplyr code translates!), but here's an example using the low level Scanner API:

``` r
library(arrow, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
seattle_lib <- open_dataset("data/seattle-library-checkouts.parquet")

multi_threaded_scan <- Scanner$create(
  dataset = seattle_lib,
  filter = Expression$field_ref("CheckoutYear") == 2021,
  use_threads = TRUE
)
system.time(multi_threaded_scan$ToTable())
#>    user  system elapsed 
#>  22.341   6.826   7.924

single_threaded_scan <- Scanner$create(
  dataset = seattle_lib,
  filter = Expression$field_ref("CheckoutYear") == 2021,
  use_threads = FALSE
)
system.time(single_threaded_scan$ToTable())
#>    user  system elapsed 
#>  16.699   5.840  20.603
```

<sup>Created on 2022-12-01 with [reprex v2.0.2](https://reprex.tidyverse.org)</sup>

Reviewer: Nice, thanks!

How should we split it up?
It's reasonable to guess that our analyses might filter the data by `CheckoutYear`, so we'll use that as our partitioning variable.

Partitioning a data set can be done using the `write_dataset()` function from the arrow package, which respects the grouping created by the dplyr `group_by()` function.
To create a multi-file data set that contains a separate file for each year of library checkout data, we can do this:

```{r write-dataset}
#| eval: !expr "!file.exists('data/seattle-library-checkouts/CheckoutYear=2021/part-0.parquet')"
seattle_lib |>
  group_by(CheckoutYear) |>
  write_dataset(
    path = "data/seattle-library-checkouts",
    format = "parquet"
  )
```

The `path` argument is used to specify the folder into which all the data files will be written, and the `format` argument is used to specify the file format for the data files.
We'll talk more about the parquet format in @sec-parquet.
For the moment, let's take a look at the files:

```{r show-parquet-files}
seattle_lib_files <- list.files(
  path = "data/seattle-library-checkouts",
  recursive = TRUE
) 

> seattle_lib_files

Reviewer: I wonder if it's worth turning this into a tibble? Then you could have a column for file size (in MB?) and it would automatically truncate to just the first six files.

Author: good idea!

> # Binary data formats {#sec-binary-data}

Reviewer: Maybe we should freeze (https://quarto.org/docs/projects/code-execution.html#freeze) this doc so we don't need to try and rebuild on github?

```{r setup}
#| results: "asis"
#| echo: false
source("_common.R")
status("drafting")
```

## Introduction

### Prerequisites

This chapter focuses on large data sets, and binary file formats that are well suited to working with them.
We'll use a data set of item checkouts from Seattle public libraries, available online at [data.seattle.gov/Community/Checkouts-by-Title/tmmm-ytt6](https://data.seattle.gov/Community/Checkouts-by-Title/tmmm-ytt6).

> The data is distributed as a single 9GB csv file, so it may take some time to download.

Reviewer: Should we make this available in an S3 bucket (or similar)? And maybe suggest some R code to download it?

Maybe the first section in the chapter should be "getting big datasets", where you could show how to download a file with code and then maybe move in the contents of "Data in the cloud"

Reviewer 2: Agreed with this — adding details of where | how to get this would be fantastic. And if we presume that someone will already have (or be willing to install) arrow in this chapter, we could utilize [`copy_files()`](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/reference/copy_files.html) which IMHO is a pretty nice way to fetch files from S3

Reviewer: @jonkeane does that have a progress bar? and some ability to resume if the connection is interrupted?

Reviewer 2: IMO, it should do both — though AFAIK it doesn't currently.

We have an issue for a progress bar: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-14611 (though there was some hesitancy there that it might be out of scope for the Arrow C++ internals)

So maybe ultimately we should use a different method of fetching these that has better UX than `copy_files` currently does?

Reviewer: Yeah, that would be nice, but I don't know of anything off the rack 😞

Reviewer 3: +1 for starting the chapter with getting some large (or subset of large) data. If the `copy_files` UX is too minimal (however it is my go-to for S3/GCS at this time), there is the option of letting the reader manually download the data _or_ point `open_dataset()` to the example data hosted in an S3 bucket. There are trade-offs -- the latter can be _slow_ but also means not downloading anything.

Author: Given the concerns expressed about the intended scope of the arrow FileSystem interface, and the intended audience of R4DS, it might be best to avoid using `copy_files()` in this chapter; and relatedly, I'm now leaning towards replacing the section talking about Arrow cloud support with a more generic sentence that mentions that this support exists and then links out to the relevant vignette in the Arrow docs.

In the meantime, I'm wondering if the best approach is to host a copy of the csv file in an s3 bucket and then fall back on `download.file()` as the example of how to download?

For the purposes of this chapter we'll assume that you have a local copy of the file at `data/seattle-library-checkout.csv`.

```{r load-packages}
#| message: false
#| warning: false
library(tidyverse)
library(arrow)
library(duckdb)
library(dbplyr)
```

## The arrow package

In this chapter we'll rely on Apache Arrow ([arrow.apache.org](https://arrow.apache.org/)), a multi-language toolbox designed for efficient analysis and transport of large data sets.
The arrow package provides a standard way to use Apache Arrow in R, and allows you to analyze larger-than-memory datasets using familiar dplyr syntax.

> As an additional benefit, arrow is extremely fast: you'll see some examples later in the chapter.

Reviewer 2: Would this be a good place to put a direct link to the arrow R package docs too? I know it's "just" two clicks away at arrow.apache.org, but for some folks it might be just disorienting enough to be impactful?

### Opening a dataset

Let's start by taking a look at the Seattle library checkout data.

> At 9GB in size, the csv file is large enough that we probably don't want to load the whole thing into memory.

Reviewer: Mention some rule of thumb like that you usually want 2x the memory?

Instead of using `read_csv()` we'll use the `open_dataset()` function from the arrow package:

The data set is large enough that we might not want to try loading the entire thing into memory.
Instead, we'll use `arrow::open_dataset()` to scan the file on-disk and create an Arrow Dataset object called `seattle_lib`:

```{r open-dataset}
seattle_lib <- open_dataset(
  sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.csv", 
  format = "csv"
)
```

> When this code is run, `open_dataset()` scans the file to work out its structure and creates the `seattle_lib` object that stores metadata.

Reviewer 2: You might have decided to tactically leave out this detail, but I wonder if we should still mention that "scans" in this sentence is only the first little bit of the file (enough to do type inference and construct a schema) and is not the whole file?

The data remain on-disk, and are not loaded into memory.
Nevertheless, we are able to call dplyr functions to interact with the data:

```{r glimpse-data}
#| cache: true

> glimpse(seattle_lib)

Reviewer: What does it look like if you just print it?

Reviewer 4: The print method prints column names and types (i.e. the schema) but does not print any data values.

Reviewer: My qualm with glimpse is that I don't think we use it elsewhere in the book, but maybe I should fix that.

Reviewer 5: I use `glimpse()` pretty regularly in teaching, so I think it's good to add to other places in the book.

Author: +1 for using glimpse a little more in the book. I use glimpse a lot in writing posts and (used to, when I taught) find it really helpful for teaching purposes too. Happy to remove it here though if that's preferable

Reviewer 5: I've added it in #1115, I'd say should be good to leave in

Reviewer: I also added it to https://r4ds.hadley.nz/data-transform.html#nycflights13

```

The first line in the output tell you that `seattle_lib` is stored locally on-disk as a single csv file.
The second line indicates that the data are stored as a tabular data set with 41 million rows and 12 columns.

### Using dplyr with arrow

> Writing dplyr code for arrow data is conceptually similar to dbplyr, described in @sec-import-databases.

Reviewer: I think this section could do with a bit more content before diving into the technical details. I think that maybe you could save to partitioned parquet here to talk a bit about performance, and then go into the details later.  (i.e move some of the "Parquet files are faster" section here).

The dplyr code that you write in R is internally transformed to a query that the Apache Arrow C++ library understands, which is then executed when you call `collect()`.
Here's an example that counts the total number of books checked out in each year:

```{r books-by-year}
#| cache: true
seattle_lib |> 
  filter(MaterialType == "BOOK") |>
  group_by(CheckoutYear) |>
  summarise(TotalCheckouts = sum(Checkouts)) |>
  arrange(desc(CheckoutYear)) |>
  collect()
```

> Only some R expressions are understood by arrow, so you will not necessarily be able to write exactly the same code you usually would.

Reviewer: Like dbplyr, ...

However, the list of operations and functions supported is fairly extensive and growing.
A complete list is provided in the arrow package documentation at [arrow.apache.org/docs/r/reference/acero.html](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/reference/acero.html).

## The parquet file format

When working with small data sets, csv files can be convenient: they're human readable plain text files, and most analysis tools can read data from a csv.
However, there are some drawbacks:

-   Ambiguity.

>     A csv file does not uniquely specify the data structure.

Reviewer: Need to link to "column types" section (currently only available in https://github.com/hadley/r4ds/pull/1128)

    For example, a csv reader has to guess whether `"2022-10-08"` should be parsed as a string or a date.

>     If it is a date, it has to guess whether the date refers to October 8th or August 10th.

Reviewer 2: `YYYY-DD-MM` is prue date format chaos. I'm fine to leave this as is, but maybe using `08-10-2022` would elucidate the point with an example that many people have had to deal with?

    Here is a slightly contrived example.
    Here is a small tibble that contains some integers and some strings that look suspiciously like dates:

    ```{r csv-ambiguity-example}
    original <- tibble(
      integers = 1L:3L,
      strings = c("2022-01-01", "1980-12-01", "1900-12-12")
    )
    original
    ```

    Simple though it is, this data set poses problems for a csv file.
    The csv version of this data does not explicitly specify that the first column contains integers and the second column contains strings.
    This produces ambiguity because the csv reader guesses that the data types are double and character respectively:

    ```{r csv-ambiguity-failure}
    csv_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".csv")
    write_csv(original, csv_file)
    read_csv(csv_file, show_col_types = FALSE)
    ```

    The `read_csv()` and `write_csv()` functions are designed to avoid this issue to an extent, but it is impossible to avoid it completely because the csv format is inherently ambiguous.

> -   Inaccuracy.

Reviewer: I'd make this the last bullet, since it'd be unusual for this to make any practical difference.

    Plain text files store binary numeric data inaccurately due to precision limits.
    We can verify this by writing 1000 random numbers to a csv file and then reloading the data from the file

    ```{r csv-precision-failure}
    #| message: false
    csv_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".csv")
    original <- tibble(old_x = rnorm(1000))
    write_csv(original, csv_file)
    reloaded <- read_csv(csv_file) |>
      rename(new_x = old_x)
    ```

    Now let's compare the two, counting the number of times the original value is strictly identical to the reloaded one:

    ```{r csv-precision-failure-2}
    bind_cols(original, reloaded) |> 
      mutate(same_value = old_x == new_x) |>
      count(same_value)
    ```

    A substantial proportion of the reloaded values differ from the original ones.
    These differences are very small in magnitude, and occur because the csv represents numeric values with limited precision.
    Even so this can still be a source of problems in your analysis code.

-   Poor performance.

>     Compared to other formats, csv files can be slow to read and write because the on-disk format is very different to how the data needs to be represented in-memory.

Reviewer 4: Modern CSV readers get decent read speed, though not as good as with binary formats. But the bigger difference is in file size, which does contribute to poor speed depending on the speed of your storage.

>     We'll see some examples of this later in the chapter.

Reviewer: Need "Large size" bullet to talk about (lack of) compression

The Apache Parquet file format ([parquet.apache.org](https://parquet.apache.org/)) is designed to address these limitations.
Like a csv file, a parquet file stores a single rectangular data set.
Features of the parquet format that make it appealing for data scientists include:

-   Parquet files store data in a binary format (not plain text), avoiding inaccuracies in encoding and making it faster to read and write than a csv file.
-   Parquet files store metadata that uniquely identifies the data types stored in each column, which avoids the ambiguity of csv files.

> -   Parquet files are compressed by default, and are typically much smaller than the corresponding csv files would be.

Reviewer 4: "default" is a library setting and I don't know that all parquet writers compress by default. But compression is supported and commonly used. 

The other way parquet gets better file sizes is with encodings: https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/data-pages/encodings/

> -   Parquet files internally break the data into distinct "chunks" each with associated metadata, making it possible to write intelligent file readers that can jump straight to a specific part of the data when the full data set is not needed.

Reviewer 4: While I do see the word "chunk" on https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/, I would think that if there is a term about this that would need quoting, it would be "row groups". Maybe it's best just to leave `chunk` as a word and not quoted like it is an official term.

> -   Parquet files internally break the data into distinct "chunks" each with associated metadata, making it possible to write intelligent file readers that can jump straight to a specific part of the data when the full data set is not needed.

Reviewer 2: I very much agree with dropping the quotes on `chunk` here too. I'm probably more allergic than most to quotes in these circumstances, but even if someone doesn't totally grok the technical details of row groups and how those are chunks, the basic concept of chunks and chunking is applicable enough here to facilitate understanding (i.e. we're not using the word in a super specific or super novel way that we need to flag it as special like this IMHO)

> -   Parquet files internally break the data into distinct "chunks" each with associated metadata, making it possible to write intelligent file readers that can jump straight to a specific part of the data when the full data set is not needed.

Author: Quote marks dropped :-)

> All these factors together make the parquet format appealing when working with larger data sets.

Reviewer 4: Another point worth mentioning: Parquet is widely used by big data systems, so adopting it doesn't mean locking yourself or your collaborators into an R only workflow.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'll piggyback on this comment to also say that it might be worthwhile to explicitly point out that though Apache Parquet is binary, it is an open standards-based format (as well as it being fairly widely adopted like Neal points out)

I will admit when I first encountered parquet I was personally hesitant because I thought "ugh some new proprietary binary format that I'll be stuck locked into". Even with the apache moniker in the intro, I'm not sure that would be a shibboleth of openness to everyone who is reading R4DS like it is to us.

The parquet format avoids this ambiguity.
When we write the data set to a parquet file using `write_parquet()` and then read it back in with `read_parquet()`, the data types are preserved:

```{r read-parquet-unambigiously}
parquet_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".parquet")
write_parquet(original, parquet_file)
read_parquet(parquet_file)
```

### Parquet files are binary

Earlier in this section we saw an example in which csv files store numeric data inaccurately because they use plain text rather than binary format.
Let's repeat the exercise using the binary parquet format.
We first write some random numbers to a parquet file:

```{r parquet-precision-write}
#| message: false
parquet_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".parquet")
original <- tibble(old_x = rnorm(1000))
write_parquet(original, parquet_file)
```

Next we load the file and give the reloaded variable a new name:

```{r parquet-precision-read}
reloaded <- read_parquet(parquet_file) |>
  rename(new_x = old_x)
```

Finally we bind the old and new data sets together and compare them:

```{r parquet-precision-success}

> bind_cols(original, reloaded) |> 

Reviewer 4: Is it worth noting in the read/write_parquet examples here that you're dealing with R data.frames? `bind_cols()` isn't supported on arrow Tables or Datasets, it only works here because `read_parquet()` defaults to reading in a data.frame.

Author: Maybe? I'm wondering if maybe I find a different way to write the code snippet. My worry here is that the brief for the chapter suggested by @hadley focuses on parquet primarily. I'm trying to bring in only a bare minimum of arrow concepts, so perhaps the best thing to do here is pick examples where Tables, Datasets, and data frames all behave the same way? Hopefully when https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/14514 merges it will be a little easier for us to link out to the Arrow docs here in a way that doesn't confuse Arrow novices?

  mutate(same_value = old_x == new_x) |>
  count(same_value)
```

> As you can see, numeric values stored in parquet files are stored faithfully.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps worth noting (maybe above when you talk about the benefits of Parquet) that Parquet (and Arrow for that matter) support more types than R does. So you can get better precision and support operations (like calculations on decimal types) that are not possible in R. In fact, you may get a loss of fidelity reading some types into R.

```{r dataset-performance-csv}
#| cache: true
system.time({
  open_dataset(
    sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.csv", 
    format = "csv"
  ) |>
    filter(CheckoutYear == 2021, MaterialType == "BOOK") |>
    group_by(CheckoutMonth) |>
    summarise(TotalCheckouts = sum(Checkouts)) |>
    arrange(desc(CheckoutMonth)) |>
    collect()
})
```

Now let's repeat the exercise using the parquet file:

```{r dataset-performance-parquet}
#| cache: true
system.time({
  open_dataset(
    sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts.parquet", 
    format = "parquet"
  ) |>
    filter(CheckoutYear == 2021, MaterialType == "BOOK") |>
    group_by(CheckoutMonth) |>
    summarise(TotalCheckouts = sum(Checkouts)) |>
    arrange(desc(CheckoutMonth)) |>
    collect()
})
```

The analysis of the parquet data finishes in about one tenth the time it takes to perform the same analysis with the csv data.

## Multi-file data sets

When data sets become large it is often useful to split the data across many files rather than storing everything in a single large file.

> When this structuring is done intelligently, the multi-file strategy can lead to significant improvements in performance.

Reviewer: Because it allows multiple cores to work simultaneously?

Reviewer 4: `arrow` does multithreaded reading with single files too

Author: yeah I was thinking about partitioning. I've reworded to hint to the reader that the advantage comes from reading only a subset of files. Trying to be slightly vague here because it doesn't exactly feel like the spot to start talking about predicate pushdown!

We'll illustrate this using the Seattle library data and the arrow package.

### Writing multi-file data

When deciding to pursue a multi-file strategy, the first task is to decide how to partition your data set.
If you break the data set into too few files you won't gain the performance improvements you're hoping for, but if you break it into too many you won't gain much either.
If you split the data in a meaningful way, you'll get some performance advantages, but if you split the data randomly you probably won't see a lot of gains.
There are no hard and fast rules about how to partition a data set: the results will depend on your data, access patterns, and the systems that read the data.
As a rough guide, the arrow package documentation suggests the following heuristics:

-   Avoid files smaller than 20MB and larger than 2GB.
-   Avoid partitioning layouts that produce more than 10,000 distinct files.

According to these guidelines, the Seattle library data is a little too large to be stored as a single 4GB parquet file.
We should consider splitting it up.

> As a general rule, a useful strategy for partitioning a large dataset is to create meaningful subsets based on a variable that you're likely to query on.

Reviewer 4: Not just "query" but especially "filter". You *might* get some benefits when aggregating on partition columns, but the big benefit is predicate pushdown with your filters so you don't have to touch entire files.

```{r show-parquet-files}
seattle_lib_files <- list.files(
  path = "data/seattle-library-checkouts",
  recursive = TRUE
) 
seattle_lib_files
```

These filenames follow a "self-describing" convention used by the Apache Hive project ([hive.apache.org](https://hive.apache.org/)).
Hive-style partitions name folders using a "key=value" convention, and the data files in that folder contain the subset of the data for which the key has the relevant value.
Following this convention makes it easier to locate files relevant to a particular query.

### Performance advantages

Partitioning a large data set into many smaller, meaningful files can produce substantial improvements in performance.
To illustrate, we'll repeat the analysis of the 2021 Seattle library book checkouts by month using the partitioned data:

```{r dataset-performance-multiple-parquet}
#| cache: true
system.time({
  open_dataset(
    sources = "data/seattle-library-checkouts/", 
    format = "parquet"
  ) |>
    filter(CheckoutYear == 2021, MaterialType == "BOOK") |>
    group_by(CheckoutMonth) |>
    summarise(TotalCheckouts = sum(Checkouts)) |>
    arrange(desc(CheckoutMonth)) |>
    collect()
})
```

> This is a 10-fold speed up compared to a single parquet file, and a 100-fold speed up compared to the original csv file.

Reviewer 2: I love this quantification and it's pretty nice that they are roundish numbers. Jokingly: it's beginning to sound like a tech product launch "And with our new MPUs, we've got 100x flops" :joy

## Other topics

I haven't quite worked out the best way to integrate these sections.

### Using duckdb with arrow

> One useful feature of arrow is that it is interoperable with duckdb and dbplyr.

Reviewer: Maybe this could go be a subsection in "Using dplyr with arrow"? With some connection like:

> There's also an even more direct connection between arrow and dbplyr — it's very easy to turn an arrow dataset into a duckdb datasource. This doesn't involve any memory copying, and speaks to the goals of the arrow ecosystem: enable seamless transitions from one computing framework to another.

It is possible to open a multi-file data set using arrow and then pass it to duckdb using the `to_duckdb()` function.
Doing so means that your dplyr code will now be interpreted by dbplyr (rather than arrow) and executed by duckdb.

```{r use-duckdb}
open_dataset("data/seattle-library-checkouts/") |>
  to_duckdb() |>
  filter(CheckoutYear == 2021, MaterialType == "BOOK") |>
  group_by(CheckoutMonth) |>
  summarise(TotalCheckouts = sum(Checkouts)) |>
  arrange(desc(CheckoutMonth)) |>
  collect()
```

There is an analogous function `to_arrow()` that passes control back to arrow, meaning that it is possible to swap back and forth between the duckdb and arrow back ends within a single analysis pipeline.

> This operation is extremely efficient (only the metadata need to be copied from one system to the other) can occasionally be valuable when one system implements functionality that the other does not.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This operation is extremely efficient because both libraries deal with the Arrow format, so data is passed between then without making a copy. This can occasionally be valuable when one tool implements functionality that the other does not.
```

> This operation is extremely efficient (only the metadata need to be copied from one system to the other) can occasionally be valuable when one system implements functionality that the other does not.

Reviewer 2: If you take Neal's suggestion of 

```
This operation is extremely efficient because both libraries deal with the Arrow format, so data is passed between then without making a copy. This can occasionally be valuable when one tool implements functionality that the other does not.
```

We might also add in something about serialization as well as the copying bits. Both are important, but in some ways not needing to (re)encode the data to send it is the biggest time saver

> ### The arrow in-memory and on-disk format

Reviewer: I think we could probably just skip this section?

  file = "data/seattle-library-checkouts/CheckoutYear=2021/part-0.parquet",
  as_data_frame = FALSE
)
glimpse(checkouts2021)
```

Note that the first line of output tells us this is a Table object.
A Table is the Apache Arrow analog to a data frame: it is represented in-memory, and arrow computations are done using these objects.
For our purposes, the important thing to understand is that the arrow file format is designed to be an exact on-disk analog of an in-memory Table.
You can read and write these files using the `read_ipc_file()` and `write_ipc_file()` functions in the arrow package:

```{r write-arrow-file}
arrow_file <- tempfile(fileext = ".arrow")
write_ipc_file(checkouts2021, arrow_file)
```

Note that for future releases of arrow, these functions are likely to deprecated in favour of the names `read_arrow()` and `write_arrow()` respectively.
Also note that the arrow file format was previously known as the "feather" file format, and you are likely to see references to it by that name.

To learn more about Datasets, Tables, and other arrow data objects, see the documentation on the arrow package website: [arrow.apache.org/docs/r/](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/).

> ### Data in the cloud

Reviewer 2: If we keep this section (personally, I would vote yes, but not sure what the tradeoffs are at this point...) it would be nice to also talk about how the connection of datasets being able to query only the parts of parquet files that it needs to + S3 makes for a shockingly efficient setup for processing data out of S3.

Reviewer: Could you expand on this a bit? Are you saying that arrow will read just the necessary bytes from the parquet header so it can only read the columns you request? Presumably it can only return a subset of rows the rows if the parquet file is sharded by the variable you're filtering on?

But doesn't this all have to happen a second time if you re-run the code? Or does arrow somehow magically cache the data locally?

Reviewer 2: Yeah to most of what you said:

> Are you saying that arrow will read just the necessary bytes from the parquet header so it can only read the columns you request?

Yeah, one of the parts of registering a parquet dataset in S3 is reading the headers of (some of) the files (it will read all of them if you tell it to unify schemas, otherwise it only reads the first — or perhaps the first of each shard). Then when you go to actually scan the files, it does again read the header(s) and grabs only the columns that you specify.

> Presumably it can only return a subset of rows the rows if the parquet file is sharded by the variable you're filtering on?

If the Parquet file has its rows split up into row groups (which Arrow will do by default if the files are large enough), it can use the row group statistics to discard whole chunks of row groups at a time if they don't meet a specific filter. Like you allude to, that means you'll only get a benefit if there are row groups that one can ignore — which might take careful writing of the data in the first place like with sharding. Though I've found it very useful in cases where I'm filtering out rows that contain `NA`s|`NULL`s which happen to be distributed unevenly throughout the dataset (but frequently enough that many whole row groups will be all `NA` for that column and thus can be ignored.

As for cache: I don't know of Arrow doing anything special here — so yeah if you query again it'll do the whole thing over. This workflow is good for the kinds of one-shot queries and then having something local in memory that you work with after that, but not for repeated querying of the dataset like that.

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation!

Author: I guess what I'm wondering with this is how much is worth saying in the R4DS chapter and how much do we want to push into the Arrow docs? To me it feels like most of @jonkeane's explanation is something that should be added into the "working with cloud storage" vignette on the Arrow site. I don't know if we want to be going that deep in R4DS? (Probably @hadley's call!) 

I guess the prpblem at the moment is that on the Arrow docs it's not at all clear to users that this advantage exists, and (unfortunately) this isn't one of the vignettes I worked much on in https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/14514/. I could open a ticket to expand on the vignette there perhaps?
